h1. About amq-protocol.

amq-protocol is an AMQP 0.9.1 serialization library for Ruby. It is not an
AMQP client: amq-protocol only handles serialization and deserialization.
If you want to write your own AMQP client, this gem can help you with that.

h2. How does amq-protocol relate to amqp gem, amq-protocol and libraries like bunny?

See "this page about AMQP gems family":https://github.com/ruby-amqp/amq-client/blob/master/README.textile


h2. Installation

If you use Bundler and want to use the very latest version, add this to your Gemfile:

<pre>
gem 'amq-protocol', :git => 'https://github.com/ruby-amqp/amq-protocol.git'
</pre>


h2. Development

h3. Nightly Builds

You can always find nightly builds at "gems.101ideas.cz":http://gems.101ideas.cz.

You can install them thusly:

<pre>
wget http://gems.101ideas.cz/amq-protocol-nightly.gem
gem install amq-protocol-nightly.gem
</pre>

h3. Contributing

If you want to change some code, don't edit @lib/amq/protocol/client.rb@ —
that file is generated from @protocol.rb.pytemplate@
which is a template file used by @codegen.py@. You can re-generate by running
<pre>nake ./tasks.rb generate</pre>
Please note that nake gem only runs on Ruby 1.9.2.

h2. Links

* "API Documentation":http://rdoc.info/github/ruby-amqp/amq-protocol/master/frames
* "Examples":https://github.com/ruby-amqp/amq-protocol/tree/master/examples/
* "Jabber room for contributors":xmpp://amqp-dev@conf.netlab.cz
* "Ruby AMQP mailing list":http://groups.google.com/group/ruby-amqp
* "Issue tracker":http://github.com/ruby-amqp/amq-protocol/issues
* "Continous integration server":http://jenkins.101ideas.cz/job/AMQ%20Protocol